====================
 Testing with Rebar
====================

Rebar includes some helpers for writing unit tests for Django Forms.

Generating Form Data
====================

A common pattern for testing Forms and Formsets is to create a dict of
form data to use when instantiating the form. When dealing with a
large form, or a form with lots of initial values, keeping the test in
sync can be cumbersome.

:func:`rebar.testing.flatten_to_dict` takes a Form, Formset, or
FormGroup, and returns its fields as a dict. This allows you to create
an unbound form, flatten it, and use the resulting dict as data to
test with.

If passed a FormSet, the return of ``flatten_to_dict`` will include
the ManagementForm_.

For example, if you have a form with a required field:

.. testcode::

   from django import forms

   class NameForm(forms.Form):

       first_name = forms.CharField(required=True)

You can create an unbound version of the form to generate the form
data dict from.

.. doctest::

  >>> from rebar.testing import flatten_to_dict
  >>> unbound_form = NameForm()
  >>> form_data = flatten_to_dict(unbound_form)
  >>> form_data['first_name'] = 'Larry'
  >>> NameForm(data=form_data).is_valid() is True
  True

This is an obviously oversimplified example, but ``flatten_to_dict``
allows you to focus your test on the fields that actually matter in
that context.


Empty Form Data for Formsets
============================

FormSets allow you to create a view that contains multiple instances
of the same form. FormSets have a convenience property, `empty_form`_,
which returns an empty copy of the form, with its index set to the
placeholder ``__prefix__``.

Rebar provides a convience function,
:func:`rebar.testing.empty_form_data`, which takes the empty form and
returns the form data dict with the prefix correctly filled in. For
example, if the FormSet contains a single item, the prefix will be set
to 2.

For example, assume we make a FormSet from our example ``NameForm``
above.

.. testcode::

   from django.forms import formsets
   NameFormSet = formsets.formset_factory(form=NameForm)

When we instantiate that FormSet, it will have a single form in it,
which is empty (ie, we didn't start with any forms). That forms prefix
contains "1", indicating its place in the sequence.

.. doctest::

   >>> formset = NameFormSet()
   >>> len(formset)
   1
   >>> formset[0].prefix
   u'form-0'

The empty_form property contains a copy of the NameForm, with its
prefix set to the ``__prefix__`` sentinel.

.. doctest::

   >>> formset.empty_form  # doctest: +ELLIPSIS
   <NameForm object at ...>
   >>> formset.empty_form.prefix
   u'form-__prefix__'

If we pass the FormSet to ``empty_form_data``, we'll get a dict of
data for the next form in the sequence.

.. doctest::

   >>> from rebar.testing import empty_form_data
   >>> empty_form_data (formset)
   {u'form-1-first_name': None}

You can also specify a specific index for the generated form data.

   >>> empty_form_data (formset, index=42)
   {u'form-42-first_name': None}

.. _ManagementForm: https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/1.5/topics/forms/formsets/#understanding-the-managementform
.. _`empty_form`: https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/1.5/topics/forms/formsets/#empty-form
